[pensive violin music playing]
[Sarah] 16 September.
in the year of our Lord 1702.
The wind has favored us on my journey.
The crew informs me
we are soon to make port.
I hear he is a great man.
Please. Lord.
let him be kind and handsome.
And make room in my heart
for his children.
I thought my time for marriage had passed.
but you had other plans.
- [wave crashes]
- [ship creaks]
Today I begin a new life.
I am to wed a leader.
an explorer.
the founder of this island hamlet.
I. Sarah Westcott. shall this day become
Mrs. Richard Warren.
[grunting] Just missed the fog.
Stroke of luck. I suppose.
No getting in or out once it arrives.
Straight to the church then?
[Sarah] What is he like?
Well. he's the reason we're all here.
Everyone on this island
owes a great debt to that man.
Fore he arrived. it was a place
with nothing but barren dirt.
But today. blossoms on the trees.
food for every hungry mouth. mild winters.
[chuckles] He controls
the weather. does he?
What's that?
He controls the weather.
does he? [chuckles]
No.
But a cold breeze cuts
half as quick… [grunts]
…when you've got
a warm home and a strong coat.
Who said that?
Richard Warren.
[ominous music playing]
[villager coughs. groans]
[villager coughing]
[townsperson]
Have you no kin come with you?
No.
I had resigned myself
to the lot of a spinster.
Perhaps the greater celebration may be me
no longer a charge on my father's purse.
It's a rare blessing
to marry at such an age.
Lucky the island proved too small
to furnish him a wife.
He had no choice
but to look to the mainland.
A man of stature doth require
a goodly wife to order his household.
Is he a man of-of good repute then?
- [knocks on door]
- [door opens]
Sarah. my child.
I am Pastor Collins.
shepherd of the flock here on this island.
- Pleased to meet you. Pastor.
- And I. you.
How was your journey?
[sighs] Well. I-I… I arrived
in good order. for which I give thanks.
It must seem to you a strange land.
and you a stranger in it.
but know that you have friends here
and the light of God to lift you up
whenever you feel alone.
Thank you. Pastor.
If you are ever in need. do not
think twice to come to me at any hour.
I will do what I can. by God's grace.
I will. Pastor.
Good.
[Collins] Oh.
Richard has requested
to be part of the wedding vows.
Something he's written himself.
[chuckles]
They are unique.
Unique?
Love is as strong as death.
Many waters cannot quench love.
neither can the floods drown it.
Richard. do you take
this woman to be your lawful wife?
I do.
Sarah. do you take
this man as your lawful husband?
- I do.
- [Collins] For you. as his helpmeet.
will be bound to him.
You will agree to serve him
as the Reeve Prime of the colony.
the handmaiden
to the Lord Island Protector.
I do. I do.
[Richard] Thomas.
John.
Cromwell.
Holyoke.
Frances.
Wagon wheel took her finger.
Children. your new mother.
[sighs] 'Tis a blessing to meet you all.
[chuckles] Has she a name?
[Frances] Mary.
Good name.
But I think she's missing something.
This brooch came from my mother.
[Holyoke] Is there one for each of us?
[stammers. sighs]
P-Perhaps the morrow shall yield. uh.
further tokens. [chuckles]
[church bell tolling]
At such an hour?
[tolling stops]
[unsettling music playing]
[Richard] Ensure no harm comes to them.
Have you an errand
that requires my company?
No. I have work that needs doing.
On our wedding night?
The burdens of leadership
ride my shoulders by day and by dark.
See them all laid down to their rest.
[Sarah] I set down these lines
for the first time as a married woman.
though I confess when my mother spoke
of what to expect on my wedding night.
she missed the mark.
First. there are five children here.
Second. my husband departed suddenly
with neither a caress nor a kind word.
But Christ asks us not to despair.
and I look with hope
to grow into the duties of a wife.
[thud]
[footsteps approaching]
[eerie. tense music playing]
Richard?
Richard. are you home?
[ominous music plays]
[breathing heavily]
Richard?
[gasps]
Leave me be.
[breathing heavily]
[music fades. ends]
[townsperson] You're a watcher.
I'm sorry?
You like to watch other people.
see into their business.
Forgive me. what befell them?
[townsperson] There's a plague upon us.
A violent madness comes over the infected.
[inhales sharply] Can they not be healed?
Well. that's my husband.
Town physician.
He does what he can for them.
gives them something to calm their nerves.
but heal them? No.
But don't worry.
Richard Warren always says
the bad times will end.
God be with you.
[unsettling music playing]
And with you.
[houseguest] There's three more infected
this week since the fog.
That makes 20 now in total.
[Richard groans] I have warned them
to stay out of the foul air.
[houseguest] Otis Stevens
tends to the sick every day.
But he's not infected.
[Richard] Well. not yet.
They say they suffer
from some kind of mania.
Should we be worried?
No.
[houseguest] Cornelius Evans was. uh.
the first to fall ill.
At first. had no symptoms
beyond a headache.
His wife gave him brandy.
He slept soundly. but…
he woke always with
the same headache. Here. Hmm.
[unsettling violin music playing]
Five days like this.
And his eyes
were yellow with spoiled moons.
He changed.
He was angry. confused.
Otis saw him that very night.
He told him to take a warm bath.
and he thought to come back
with a draught in the morning.
But by dawn. when Otis came back.
he saw a knot of hair in the doorway.
Went inside
and he found Cornelius on the ground.
With his fingers inside his wife's skull.
[screaming]
[houseguest] The infections
are growing faster.
It will soon overwhelm us.
We must do something.
- You must do something.
- [Richard] Sarah. um.
would you take yourself to bed?
[inhales sharply]
But I haven't finished cleaning.
[houseguest] They say that
you're in communion with this island.
that-that you whisper to it. [stammers]
You tame it. You turn it to your will.
That you are the only reason we survived
- the first years.
- [Richard] Hold your tongue.
[houseguest] They say that you kiss
that necklace like it was a cross.
but it's no cross. sir.
What is it you hide in there?
They say it is a covenant!
- [grunts. yells]
- [clattering]
- [blow lands]
- [groaning]
[sinister. tense music playing]
[groaning continues]
[Richard inhales deeply]
- [grunting]
- [groaning]
[panting]
[whimpering. sobbing]
[footsteps approaching]
[whimpers]
[door creaks]
[Sarah inhales sharply]
- [breathes shakily]
- [rooster crows]
[inhales sharply]
[mysterious music playing]
[breathing shakily]
[gasps]
[sighs]
[breathing shakily]
[breathes shakily]
[breathes heavily]
[ominous sting plays]
[gasps]
[whimpering. panting]
[banging on door]
[panting]
Child. what ails thee?
[breathes shakily. whimpers]
I feel I have greatly mistaken
my course in coming here.
[breathing shakily. whimpering]
Though my days before were sorrowful…
[stammers] …I fared well enough.
[sniffles] Perhaps the life of a…
of a childless woman without a husband.
it is… it is… It is one I could…
I could come to bear…
- Enj… Enjoy! Enjoy the role...
- Good woman. you are not making sense.
Well. I-I am filled with terror.
Pastor! [whimpers]
I saw him.
I saw him murder Ezra Lowery.
Is there a body?
No… [sniffles]
…but there's a… [stammers]
…hidden chamber beneath our home
and-and Ezra's bloody cane therein. [sobs]
You must be told the truth.
[Sarah breathes shakily]
Evil stalks this land.
- There is a wrongness about.
- [inhales sharply. sniffles]
I fear that the devil himself
has chosen your husband.
For what cause. I cannot tell.
Others share my belief.
We fear Warren consorts with him.
[sobs. sniffles]
Villagers go missing
and they're never seen again.
including his last wife.
Oh. God. [breathes heavily]
I cannot stay here a moment longer.
I want off this dreadful island.
I am but four and ten years almost.
Allow me to wither in my father's attic…
- Sarah. Sarah.
- …as my womanly destiny.
- Sarah.
- [sobs]
Know that God has chosen you
for a special purpose.
[breathing shakily]
You arrived on this island
not for the reason you thought.
but for a greater one still.
Thou art not alone.
- [sighs. inhales shakily]
- When you retire to bed tonight.
leave the front door unlatched
so that we may enter.
[softly] To do what?
What must be done.
[banging on table]
[Richard] No one understands
the burdens of leadership.
They're conspiring against me.
and you know that.
They are afraid.
The plague. the disappearances…
Disappearances?
What disappearances?
Who have you been speaking with?
I've spoken with no one.
[stammers]
[stammers] 'Tis nothing.
I… [speaks indistinctly]
[stammers] Forgive me.
I cannot make sense of my own…
My own words.
Take all the children upstairs.
The…
Children.
[foreboding music playing]
[Frances] Is something wrong?
[whispering] All shall be well.
[mysterious violin music playing]
[door creaks]
[door closes]
- [breathing shakily]
- [footsteps]
[footsteps approaching]
[door creaking]
[panting]
- [attacker grunting]
- [Richard groaning]
[Sarah panting. whimpering]
[tense. sinister music playing]
[thuds]
[footsteps]
[panting]
[gasps]
[breathing heavily]
[Richard] Did I not plainly forewarn you?
For your own safety.
you must not leave this house again.
Not to do the wash.
not to accompany the children.
- [Sarah breathing shakily. whimpers]
- [shushes]
Well. let no fear take hold.
I will unearth the one
who bears this guilt.
None may hide forever on an island
where there is no way out.
I will protect us.
[groaning]
Go to our room.
Pray.
[sobs]
[sobs. groans]
Oh. please. Oh. please.
[sobs] Oh. Father. please.
[sobs] Please. [sniffles]
[panting]
[screams]
[ominous music plays]
[breathing shakily]
[pants. breathes heavily]
[ominous music plays]
[gasps. breathes shakily]
[whimpers. breathes shakily]
[grunts]
[breathes shakily]
[gasps]
[breathing heavily]
[whimpers]
[gasps. panting]
[ominous music intensifies]
[whimpering. panting]
[whimpers]
[breathing heavily]
[grunts]
[straining]
[yelps]
[panting]
[door unlocks. opens]
Pastor Collins! [panting]
Richard is alive!
Yes. we noted that with some distress.
[breathes shakily]
Be not afraid.
This committee can be trusted.
Oh. then you all must listen.
He is not consorting with the devil.
He is the devil.
I saw him struck with a knife again
and again. but he died not.
For the good of every man. woman.
and child. you must make haste
and stop him immediately.
[sighs]
[clicks tongue] There's a secret tunnel
that leads to the house.
There's a well at the far southeastern
edge that will grant to serve you passage.
You must send ten good. strong men.
[sniffles. pants]
A merchant sailing vessel
is due to depart this evening
with a berth for you on it…
[sighs] God be thanked.
…but we need your help.
Pour this in his drink.
and he will be helpless as a babe.
No. I cannot go back there.
You must. or he shall know.
You said he must be stopped.
Now you bear the burden as well.
[townsperson] Consider the welfare
of your children.
[clicks tongue] My children?
I have but just met them.
Sarah. please.
You are our only hope
against this darkness.
[breathes shakily]
[ominous music plays]
[Sarah] I do not comprehend
the nature of the curse
that has fallen on the island.
I do know that its heart beats inside the
cylinder my husband wears around his neck.
Who will crush my throat?
His hands? This plague?
Death comes for us each.
but I-I fear to me first.
I know not how. but who.
[sniffles]
Of course. he's here with me.
so I say all this in jest.
And with that. I retire.
You're home. What a blessing.
What do you write in that book?
A woman's silly thoughts.
I want to read it.
[Sarah] I would feel too abashed.
A swig of brandy to ease your mind.
[Richard] No. I need to be clearheaded.
Go to your beds now. children.
Now. I need a quiet word with your father.
Now.
[sighs]
If folk are truly set against you.
you need your wife at your side.
[sighs]
We are married all these days
and have not yet…
known each other.
Well. the burdens that have
been placed upon me...
Let me help you bear them.
[Richard groans]
[moaning]
- What sin lies on your tongue?
- [clicks tongue] Uh…
[groans]
You're in league with them. Traitress.
[groaning]
- [grunts]
- [gasping]
[coughs. pants]
He killed my mother.
Gather your siblings. We're leaving.
[intense music plays]
[Frances] Who are they?
Just keep moving.
[Sarah. children panting]
They left without us.
[pants]
Here. into this boat. We can catch them.
Easy.
[townsperson] Are you leaving?
[gasps]
Abigail. I…
I reckon you are not well.
Go to your husband. the physician.
I did already.
I will get on board with you.
I'm sorry. there-there
is not enough space.
- [pants]
- But I am not sick!
Forgive me. there is no space.
Then leave off these children.
They're not of thy blood.
They're with me.
[breathes heavily]
And under my charge.
Stand back! I will take no more orders!
[pants]
[screams]
[gasping] Go. Go. The ropes. [pants]
[groaning]
Traitors.
You've set yourself above
the law of God and man.
You have murdered
those you swore to protect.
No!
It doesn't want you to open it.
What does not want me to open it?
That which has kept us alive.
It is just as we feared.
You have made a deal with the devil.
No. it's not the devil.
It is our God.
He's gone mad. Let us be rid of him.
You cannot rid yourself of me.
It won't allow it.
This is my burden.
Free me. you will all be forgiven.
and I will continue to carry it myself.
Your fate will be decided by God.
the one true God.
[chuckles]
[groans]
No. You cannot bury me!
You cannot bury me!
You'll doom yourselves! The pact!
The pact must be honored!
The pact which spared us… [pants]
…in that first winter.
[pants] It spoke to me
through the mushrooms!
Please. Fulfill the pact.
How?
Sacrifice! A life…
Life for life. [pants]
Whatever I have undertaken.
it has been for the welfare of our people!
[groans] Fulfill the pact
and the plague will stop!
But if you don't…
If you do not.
the terrors will not cease!
They will only deepen!
Please do not make my children
suffer for your mistake.
Your wife is taking your children
back to the mainland. far from you.
No. No. no. no.
The island won't…
The island won't let them leave.
Oh. please! Oh. please!
You'll kill them all!
[yells]
[Richard breathing heavily]
["Brandy (You're a Fine Girl)" playing]
[music continues]
[grunting. panting]
[moaning]
[groaning. panting]
- [grunting]
- [thuds]
I got it. [grunts]
[music continues]
- You got it?
- Come on.